Then the Lord smiled. This is the nature of the Awakened Ones: When they smile, light of many
various colours appears from the opening of their mouth, blue, yellow, red, white, rosy,
crystal, and the colour of silver. As it appeared it reached all the way to the heaven of
Brahma, and it penetrated innumerable world spheres with light, and returning it was absorbed
into the top of the head (uṣṇīṣa) of the Lord.Then the Venerable Ānanda, having seen
the Lord smile, went up to his feet and put his cloak over the shoulder and placing the right
knee on the ground he bowed his head as he joined his palms in veneration in the direction
of the Lord, addressing the Lord as follows:The Tathāgatas, the Arhats, the completely
Awakened ones do not smile without a specific reason and cause, so, Lord, what is the reason,
what is the cause, why you smiled? Then he spoke the following verses:

1) The leader, the knower of the world, for whom there is no false doctrine, the teacher does
not smile without a cause. Thus, since you have smiled, we request you earnestly: What is
the cause of your smile?2) Having seen the smile of the victorious doubt has arisen in the
world including the gods. So we ask you to clear away the uncertainty of the doubtful,
you best of men, please demonstrate to us the cause why you smile.3) Who are the ones having
set their minds on religion? Who are the ones who in reality have been seen by the Victorious
Ones? Who are those having today made offerings to and praised the Awakened One? This
is what we wish to hear.4) Who are the ones having defeated Māra and his flock? By whom
have the mind of the of our teacher been satisfied today? Who have understood the depth of
the conditioned things today? We ask you to hear that, please clear away our doubts.5) All
the world praises you with the palms of their hands joined because they want to hear why
our leader smiled. You best of beings with two feet, produce compassion and please clear
away the perplexity of doubtfulness.

