II. Then the princely Mañjuśrī came out of his meditative absorption, and generating great compassion
for all living beings he thought (atha mañjuśrīḥ kumārbhūtaḥ pratisaṃlayanād vyutthāya
sarvasatveṣu mahākaruṇām utpādya tasyābhavat):“Who are the living beings who can be
brought to maturity in this great way by means of miracles of magic, the miracle of teachings
or the miracle of admonition?” (ke satvā ye etasmin mahāyāna ṛddhiprātihāryeṇa vādeśanāprātihāryeṇa
vānuśāsanīprātihāryeṇa paripācayitavyā iti).And the princely Mañjuśrī saw the
daughter of a courtesan Suvarṇottamaprabhāśrī having mounted the cart with the son of a
banker Bhayadatta to go to the park (mañjuśrīḥ kumārabhūtaḥ suvarṇottaraprabhāśriyaṃ gaṇikāduhitāraṃ
bhayadattena śreṣṭhiputreṇa sārdhaṃ ratham ārūḍhām udyānabhūmiṃ gacchatīṃ dadarśa).Having
seen her he considered her ability, her power and vigour for being trained, and
finding her as possessing the power of earlier roots of good and the ability of understanding
(dṛṣṭvā ca vineyārthaṃ tasyā indriyabalavīryaviśeṣaṃ vyavalokayan tāṃ pūrvakuśalamūlājñendriyabalādhānāṃ
viditvā), the princely Mañjuśrī produced such a miracle of magic, a miracle
by which (atha mañjuśrīḥ kumārabhūtas tathārūpam ṛddhyabhisaṃskāram abhisaṃskaroti
sma yathārūpeṇābhisaṃskāreṇābhisaṃskṛtena) he overpowered even the light of both the sun and
the moon as soon as he showed himself, so what then about [the light] of other beings (kiṃ
tv anyeṣāṃ satvānām)!And having transformed himself (ātmānam abhinirmāya) in that way,
he showed himself as wearing a shining garment (vastra), the lustre of which illuminated
a circle a yojana across, and he showed himself as wearing all kinds of ornaments (sarvabhūṣaṇavibhūṣita).Then
the princely Mañjuśrī, wearing that garment and adorned with all those
ornaments, sat down by the road where the daughter of a courtesan Suvarṇottamaprabhāśrī
was coming.

And as soon as the princely Mañjuśrī sat down there, the cart of the banker’s son was darkened
(dhyāmīkṛta), and even the whole body of the daughter of a courtesan Suvarṇottamaprabhāśrī
was darkened.Just as (tad yathā) if you put something soaked with ink (maṣī) beside gold
from the Jambu river (jāmbūnadasuvarṇa), it does not shine, it is not bright, not radiant
(na bhāsate na tapate na virocate), in the same way (evam eva), as the light from the body
of the princely Mañjuśrī touched the body of the daughter of a courtesan Suvarṇottamaprabhāśrī
did not shine, was not bright, not radiant.

The daughter of a courtesan Suvarṇottamaprabhāśrī saw the princely Mañjuśrī sitting there, looking
like a divine youth (devaputrakumāra), his body adorned with ornaments, clothed in
the shining garment, and the light emanating from that garment.And as soon she had seen him,
a feeling of contempt (avamanyanāsaṃjñā) for her own body arose in her, and a feeling of
inferiority (hīnasaṃjñā), and she conceived a desire for possessing (abhilaṣagrāhyasaṃjñā)
that garment.She thought: “I have had enough of this banker’s son, I will alight from this
cart to amuse myself, play and be with this [man instead] (tena sārdhaṃ rame krīḍāmi paricārayāmi),
then I also can ask him for that garment.”

But as soon as the girl had made that thought, the great divine king (mahārāja) Vaiśravaṇa,
who had transformed himself into a man (manuṣyarūpam ātmānam abhinirmāya) with the help of
the magic (adhiṣṭhāna) of the princely Mañjuśrī, told that girl:– Girl (dārike), do not make
thoughts of passion (saṃraktacitta) towards this good man (satpuruṣa)! Why? Because he
never seeks pleasure (tatkāmānarthikatvāt).The girl said: – Who is he? What is his name?Vaiśravaṇa
said: – He is a bodhisatva, and he is called the princely Mañjuśrī (mañjuśrīkumārabhūta).The
girl said: – But what then, is a bodhisatva? Is it a god, or is it a snake-god,
a demon, a celstial musician, giant, divine bird, man-horse, great serpent, a king of the
gods or a creator god, a world protector or a great king? What is a bodhisatva? (tad bodhisatva
iti kiṃ? kiṃ tad deva āhosvin nāgo vā yakṣo vā gandharvo vāsuro vā garuḍo vā kiṃnaro
vā mahorago vā śakro vā brahmā vā lokapālo vā maharājaḥ? tad bodhisatva iti kiṃ?)Vaiśravaṇa
said: – Girl, a bodhisatva is not a god, not a snake-god, not a demon, not a celstial
musician, not a giant, not a divine bird, not a man-horse, not a great serpent, not a king
of the gods or a creator god, not a world protector or a great king.Girl, he is one who
fulfills the wishes of all beings (sarvasatvāśayaparipūrin), that is why he is called a bodhisatva,he
is one who gives to all who beg (sarvayācakānāṃ dāyakaḥ) and does not send away
anybody, that is why he is called a bodhisatva.

Then the girl thought: “According to those words he will give me this garment,” and after the
daughter of a courtesan Suvarṇottamaprabhāśrī had alighted from the cart, she adressed herself
to the princely Mañjuśrī:– Mañjuśrī, please give me the garment in which your body
is clothed!Having been adressed thus the princely Mañjuśrī spoke to the girl in the following
way (evam uktaś ca mañjuśrīḥ kumārabhūtas tāṃ dārikām uvāca):– Sister, if you produce
the thought of awakening, I will give you this garment (bodhicittaṃ bhagini tvam utpādayer
ahaṃ cedaṃ vastraṃ te dāsyāmi).The girl said (dārikovāca): – What then, Mañjuśrī, is ‘awakening’
(bodhir iti mañjuśrīs tat kiṃ)?Mañjuśrī said (mañjuśrīr uvāca): – Sister, you are
the awakening yourself (tvam eva bhagini bodhiḥ).The girl said (dārikovāca): – How, Mañjuśrī,
am I the awakening, I do not understand the sense of what you say (kathaṃ mañjuśry ahaṃ
bodhiḥ, na tvadbhāṣitasyārthaṃ jānāmi).Then she spoke the following verse (atha khalv imāṃ
gāthām abhāṣata):

– If you have entered the awakening, Mañjughoṣa, you should give me this garment (cīvara); a
stingy (matsarin) bodhisatva has no beauty, he is like a dried up river where there is no
water.

Mañjuśrī said:

– If you, my girl, enter the awakening, I will give you this garment today, because even the
whole world – including the gods – finds worthy of offering those who unswervingly (acalita)
stay with the thought of awakening (bodhicitta).

The girl said:

– So what, then, is the meaning of the word (padārtha) awakening (bodhi)? From whom is it attained?
Who will grant it? In which religious groups (gaṇa) is it taught (nirdiṣṭa)? Let those
not clever (akuśala), those without understanding (anadhigata) understand!

